What types of lies did Frank Abagnale Jr. tell, and how would you describe his methods of deception? What did you see in his relationship with his parents and peers that mirrors ideas from the reading on children as liars and targets of lies? Can you apply any of Bok's ideas concering white lies, excuses, and justifications to any of his actions? What do you make of Abagnale's claim now to be reformed and working for good? 

Frank Abagnale is a compulsive liar with a callous disregard for any semblance of sanctity for the truth. However he is not wholly without compassion. For example, one of the first acts of deception he engages in is done for the sole purpose of helping a stranger. A classmate attempts to deceive the school authority with a fraudulent note to visit the doctor and Abagnale offers unprompted advice to help her get away with it. By doing so he illustrates a trust that she has good reason for engaging in deception and exemplifies an empathetic comradery in aiding her. This is a classic example of a lie that Abagnale clearly believed to be for some form of common good. Despite this very human act, Bok would still admonish this lie. Bok follows a "lie only as a last resort" position, and skipping class is not necessary nor noble and therefore aiding someone in doing so would only serve to erode trust. This position is best shown by subjecting the deception to Bok's three tests of morality. Getting to skip class by being honest and simply stating this outright would certainly not work, so this deception actually passes the first test - since the same goal is not achievable without deception, this lie might be permissible. Ironically, the deception could feasibly pass the second test as well. Understanding that this lie is particularly common, and its innocuous nature leaving an easy path to forgiveness, one could reasonably conclude that an audience of peers would be unpurturbed by this lie, and likewise that the deceived would likely not think twice. Therefore it stands to reason that since this lie is clearly selfish and unhelpful, it must fail the third test. However depending upon the deceiever's subjective experience of the world - it might not. The third test states that one must "seek the approval of an imaginary audience of 'reasonable' people who subscribe to a shared moral code." Since Abagnale's main role model was his father, a man known not to shy from deception, its not unreasonable that in his mind a set of peers would evaluate the deception as acceptable. This is an interesting departure from the foregone conclusion previously drawn, and almost purely up to sujective speculation, but these tests prove that a young Abagnale did not lie discompassionately. 

---- ^^^ This is the 400 words limit ----

It is possible that Abagnale's claim to be now divorced from his history of deception is pure-intentioned and truthful. However I personally do not believe this. Abagnale operates under a moral code incredibly different from my own. His code has repeatedly allowed him to excuse large scale and harmful deception, so it stands to reason that this moral code would also excuse lying to the world about his intentions for the future. Akin to the "boy who cried wolf," its hard to believe a man who lied so profusely and for so long.


Tangent: I think its interesting they chose to start the movie by directly challenging a sense of truth by having a gameshow where the audience (and viewers of the movie) do not know who is who and what is right.